---
title: Apache Kafka® concepts
---

A comprehensive glossary of essential Apache Kafka® terms and their meaning.

## Broker {#Broker}

A server that operates Apache Kafka, responsible for message storage,
processing, and delivery. Typically part of a cluster for enhanced
scalability and reliability, each broker functions independently but is
integral to Kafka's overall operations, separate from tools like Apache
Kafka Connect.

## Consumer

An application that reads data from Apache Kafka, often processing or
acting upon it. Various tools used with Apache Kafka ultimately function
as either a producer or a consumer when communicating with Apache Kafka.

## Consumer groups

Groups of consumers in Apache Kafka are used to scale beyond a single
application instance. Multiple instances of an application coordinate to
handle messages, with each group allocated to different partitions for
even workload distribution.

## Event-driven architecture

Application architecture centered around responding to and processing
events.

## Event {#Event}

A single discrete data unit in Apache Kafka, consisting of a `value`
(the message body) and often a `key` (for quick identification) and
`headers` (metadata about the message).

## Kafka node

See [Broker](#Broker)

## Kafka server

See [Broker](#Broker)

## Message

See [Event](#Event)

## Partitioning

A method used by Apache Kafka to distribute a topic across multiple
servers. Each server acts as the `leader` for a partition, ensuring data
sharding and message order within each partition.

## Producer

An application that writes data into Apache Kafka without concern for
the data consumers. The data can range from well-structured to simple
text, often accompanied by metadata.

## Pub/sub

A publish-subscribe messaging architecture where messages are
broadcast by publishers and received by any listening subscribers,
unlike point-to-point systems.

## Queueing

A messaging system where messages are sent and received in the order
they are produced. Apache Kafka maintains a watermark for each consumer
to track the most recent message read.

## Record

See [Event](#Event)

## Replication

Apache Kafka's feature for data replication across multiple servers,
ensuring data preservation even if a server fails. This is configurable
per topic.

## Topic

Logical channels in Apache Kafka through which messages are organized.
Topics are named in a human-readable manner, like `sensor-readings` or
`kubernetes-logs`.
