---
title: Aiven for Apache Flink® managed service features
sidebar_label: Managed service features
---

As a fully managed distributed data stream processing platform,
deployable in the cloud of your choice, some of the key features of a
managed Flink service include the following:

## Cluster deployment mode

Aiven for Apache Flink® is configured to use the [HashMap state
backend](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-stable/api/java/org/apache/flink/runtime/state/hashmap/HashMapStateBackend.html).
This means that the
[state](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/concepts/stateful-stream-processing/#what-is-state)
is stored in memory, which can impact the performance of jobs that
require keeping a very large state. We recommend you provision your
platform accordingly.

The Flink cluster executes applications in [session
mode](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-stable/docs/deployment/overview/#session-mode)
so you can deploy multiple Flink jobs on the same cluster, thus
effectively utilizing the available resources.

## Scaling a Flink cluster

Each node is equipped with a TaskManager and JobManager. We recommend
scaling up your cluster to add more CPU and memory for the TaskManager
before attempting to scale out, so you make the best use of the
resources with a minimum number of nodes.

By default, each TaskManager is configured with a single slot for
maximum job isolation. It is highly recommended that you modify this
option to match your requirements.

:::warning
Adjusting the task slots per TaskManager requires a cluster restart.
:::

## Cluster restart strategy

The default restart strategy of the cluster is set to `Failure Rate`.
This controls how Apache Flink restarts in case of failures during job
execution. Administrators can change this setting in the advanced
configuration options of the service.

For more information on available options, refer to [Apache Flink fault
tolerance](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/config/#fault-tolerance)
documentation.

## Disaster recovery

Periodic checkpoints have been configured to be persisted externally in
object storage. They allow Flink to recover states and positions in the
streams by giving the application the same semantics as a failure-free
execution. For information on checkpoints, see
[Checkpoints](/docs/products/flink/concepts/checkpoints).

## Security considerations

All services run on a dedicated virtual machine with end-to-end
encryption, and all nodes are firewall-protected. The credentials used
for data flow integrations between Flink and other Aiven services have
read/write permissions on the clusters. You can set up separate clusters
for writing processed data from Flink and restrict access if you need
more strict access management than our default setup offers. This also
minimizes the risk of accidental write events to the source cluster.

## Cluster logging, metrics, and alerting

Log and metrics integration to Aiven services are available for
administrators to configure so you can monitor the health of your
service.

By enabling these integrations, you can:

-   Push service logs into an index in Aiven for OpenSearch®.
-   Push service metrics to M3®, InfluxDB®, or PostgreSQL® services on
    Aiven.
-   Create custom OpenSearch or Grafana® dashboards to monitor the
    service.
