---
title: Monitoring consumer groups in Aiven for Apache Kafka®
---

With Aiven for Apache Kafka® dashboards and telemetry, you can monitor
the performance and system resources of your Aiven for Apache Kafka
service. Aiven provides pre-built dashboards and telemetry for your
service, allowing you to collect and visualize telemetry data using
InfluxDB® and Grafana®. Aiven streamlines the process by automatically
configuring the dashboards for each of your Aiven for Apache Kafka
instances.

This section builds on the
[service integrations](/docs/platform/concepts/service-integration) documentation and provides an in-depth look at consumer
group graphs and related key terminology in Aiven for Apache Kafka®.
Consumer group graphs offer valuable insights into the behavior of
Apache Kafka consumers, which is crucial for maintaining a continuously
running production Kafka system.

## Topics

In Apache Kafka®, a topic serves as a unique channel for discussions.
Producers send messages to the topic while consumers read those
messages. For instance, in a topic named `soccer`, you can read what
others say about soccer (acting as a consumer) or post messages about
soccer (acting as a producer).

## Topic partitions

The storage of messages for an Apache Kafka® topic can be spread across
one or more topic partitions. For instance, in a topic that has 100
messages and is set up to have 5 partitions, 20 messages would be
assigned to each partition.

## Consumer groups

Apache Kafka® allows multiple consumers to read messages from a Kafka
topic. This improves the message consumption rate and overall
performance. Organizing consumers into consumer groups identified by a
group ID is common practice. Consumer groups consume messages from a
topic with messages spread across multiple partitions. Apache Kafka
ensures that each message is consumed by only one consumer, which is
essential for certain classes of business applications.

For example, with a topic having 100 messages across five partitions and
five consumers in a consumer group, each consumer will be allocated a
distinct partition, consuming 20 messages each.

If the number of consumers exceeds the number of partitions, extra
consumers remain idle until an active consumer exits. Also, a consumer
cannot read from a partition not assigned to it.

## Consumer group telemetry

Aiven for Apache Kafka provides built-in consumer group graphs that
offer valuable telemetry to monitor and manage consumer groups
effectively.

### Consumer group graph: consumer group replication lag

Consumer group lag is an important metric in your Apache Kafka
dashboard. It shows how far behind the consumers in a group are in
consuming messages on the topic. A significant lag could indicate one of
two scenarios - terminated consumers or consumers who are alive but
unable to keep up with the rate of incoming messages. Persistent lag for
long durations may indicate that the system is not behaving according to
plan, requiring investigation and follow-up actions to resolve the
issue.

The terms `Consumer group lag` and `Consumer group replication lag` can
be used interchangeably. Consumer Group Lag is typically a metric
provided by the client side, while Aiven computes its metric known as
Consumer Group Replication Lag (`kafka_consumer_group_rep_lag`) by
fetching information about partitions and consumer groups from broker
side. This metric captures the difference between the latest published
offset (high watermark) and the consumer group offset for the same
partition.

The consumer group graph below, which is enabled by default, provides
valuable insights into consumer behavior. It displays the consumer group
replication lag, indicating how far behind the consumers are in
consuming messages from a topic. This graph provides information about
consumer behavior, enabling you to take appropriate action if necessary.

![Image of consumer group replication lag](/images/content/products/kafka/consumer-group-graphs-for-kafka-dashboards.png)

### Consumer group offset telemetry

In Apache Kafka, messages are written into a partition as append-only
logs and each message is assigned a unique incremental number called the
offset. These offsets indicate the exact position of messages within the
partition.

Aiven for Apache Kafka provides offset telemetry, which can help
understand message consumption patterns and troubleshoot issues. The
`kafka_consumer_group_offset` metric identifies the consumer group's
most recent committed offset, which can be used to determine its
relative position within the assigned partitions.
