---
title: Check and avoid transaction ID wraparound
---

The PostgreSQL® transaction control mechanism assigns a transaction ID
to every row that is modified in the database; these IDs control the
visibility of that row to other concurrent transactions.

The transaction ID is a 32-bit number, where 2 billion (2 thousand
million) IDs are always in the \"visible past\" and the remainder (about
2.2 billion) are reserved for future transactions and not visible to the
running transaction. To avoid a transaction wraparound and having old,
existing rows invisible when more transactions are created, PostgreSQL®
requires an occasional cleanup and \"freezing\" of old rows.

## Automatic or manual vacuuming

You can manually trigger a cleanup by executing `VACUUM FREEZE`, but the
autovacuum also does this automatically once a configured number of
transactions have been created since the last freeze.

## Check the `autovacuum` frequency

Aiven for PostgreSQL® sets that number to scale according to the
database size, up to 1.5 billion transactions (which leaves 500 million
transaction IDs available before a forced freeze), to avoid unnecessary
churn for stable data in existing tables. To check your transaction
freeze limits, run the following command in your PostgreSQL® instance:

```
show autovacuum_freeze_max_age
```

This shows you the number of transactions that trigger autovacuum to
start freezing old rows.

## Configuring client applications

Some applications may not automatically adjust their configuration based
on the actual PostgreSQL® configuration and may show unnecessary
warnings. For example, [PgHero](https://github.com/ankane/pghero)'s
default settings trigger an alert once 500 million transactions have
been created, while the correct behavior might be to trigger an alert
after 1.5 billion transactions. The `transaction_id_danger` setting
controls this behavior, and changing the value from 1500000000
(1,500,000,000 or 1.5 billion) to 500000000 (500,000,000 or 500 million)
would make it warn you when appropriate.

## Related pages

-   [25.1.5. Preventing Transaction ID Wraparound
    Failures](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/routine-vacuuming.html#VACUUM-FOR-WRAPAROUND)
-   [Table 9.76. Transaction ID and Snapshot Information
    Functions](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/functions-info.html#FUNCTIONS-PG-SNAPSHOT)
