---
title: Migrate to Aiven for PostgreSQL® with pg_dump and pg_restore
---

:::tip
We recommend to migrate your PostgreSQL® database to Aiven by using
[aiven-db-migrate](migrate-aiven-db-migrate).
:::

Aiven for PostgreSQL® supports the same tools as a regular PostgreSQL
database, so you can migrate using the standard `pg_dump` and
`pg_restore` tools.

The [pg_dump](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgdump.html)
tool can be used to extract the data from your existing PostgreSQL
database and
[pg_restore](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgrestore.html)
can then insert that data into your Aiven for PostgreSQL database. The
duration of the process depends on the size of your existing database.

During the migration no new data written to the database is included.
You should turn off all write operations to your source database server
before you run the `pg_dump`.

:::tip
You can keep the write operations enabled, and use the steps to try out
the migration process first before the actual migration. This way, you
will find out about the duration, and check everything works without
downtime.
:::

## Variables

You can use the following variables in the code samples provided:

 | Variable           | Description                                                                             |
 | ------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
 | `SRC_SERVICE_URI`  | Service URI for the source PostgreSQL connection                                        |
 | `DUMP_FOLDER`      | Local Folder used to store the source database dump files                               |
 | `DEST_PG_NAME`     | Name of the destination Aiven for PostgreSQL service                                    |
 | `DEST_PG_PLAN`     | Aiven plan for the destination Aiven for PostgreSQL service                             |
 | `DEST_SERVICE_URI` | Service URI for the destination PostgreSQL connection, available from the Aiven Console |

## Perform the migration

1.  If you don't have an Aiven for PostgreSQL database yet, run the
    following command to create a couple of PostgreSQL services via
    [Aiven CLI](/docs/tools/cli) substituting the
    parameters accordingly:

    ```
    avn service create --project PROJECT_NAME -t pg -p DEST_PG_PLAN DEST_PG_NAME
    ```

    :::tip
    Aiven for PostgreSQL allows you to easily switch between different
    service plans, but for the duration of the initial migration process
    using `pg_dump`, we recommend that you choose a service plan that is
    large enough for the task. This allows you to limit downtime during
    the migration process. Once migrated, you can scale the plan size up
    or down as needed.
    :::

    Aiven automatically creates a `defaultdb` database and `avnadmin` user
    account, which are used by default.

1.  Run the `pg_dump` command substituting the `SRC_SERVICE_URI` with
    the service URI of your source PostgreSQL service, and `DUMP_FOLDER`
    with the folder where you want to store the dump in:

    ```
    pg_dump -d 'SRC_SERVICE_URI' --jobs 4 --format directory -f DUMP_FOLDER
    ```

    The `--jobs` option in this command instructs the operation to use 4
    CPUs to dump the database. Depending on the number of CPUs you have
    available, you can use this option to adjust the performance to better
    suit your server.

    :::tip
    If you encounter problems with restoring your previous object ownerships
    to users that do not exist in your Aiven database, use the `--no-owner`
    option in the `pg_dump` command. You can create the ownership hierarchy
    after the data is migrated.
    :::

1.  Run `pg_restore` to load the data into the new database:

    ```
    pg_restore -d 'DEST_SERVICE_URI' --jobs 4 DUMP_FOLDER
    ```

    :::note
    If you have more than one database to migrate, repeat the `pg_dump`
    and `pg_restore` steps for each database.
    :::

1.  Switch the connection settings in your applications to use the new
    Aiven database once you have migrated all of your data.

    :::warning
    The user passwords are different from those on the server that you
    migrated from. Go to the **Users** tab for your service in the Aiven
    web console to check the new passwords.
    :::

1.  Connect to the target database via `psql`:

    ```
    psql 'DEST_SERVICE_URI'
    ```

1.  Run the `ANALYZE` command to apply proper database statistics for
    the newly loaded data:

    ```
    newdb=> ANALYZE;
    ```

If you got this far, then all went well and your Aiven for PostgreSQL
database is now ready to use.

## Handle `pg_restore` errors

When migrating PostgreSQL databases to Aiven via `pg_restore` you could
encounter errors like:

```
could not execute query: ERROR: must be owner of extension <extension>
```

For example, the following `pg_restore` error appears quite commonly:

```
pg_restore: [archiver (db)] could not execute query: ERROR: must be owner of extension <some_extension>
```

This type of error is often related to the lack of superuser-level
privileges blocking non-essential queries.

A typical example is due to failing `COMMENT ON EXTENSION` queries
trying to replace the documented comment string for an extension. In
such cases, the errors are harmless and can be ignored. Alternatively,
use the `--no-comments` parameter in `pg_restore` to skip these queries.

:::tip
`pg_restore` offers similar `--no-XXX` options to switch off other,
often unnecessary restore queries. More information is available in the
[PostgreSQL
documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgrestore.html).
:::

### Poor performance after migration

Whenever you load data with the `pg_restore` or similar tools, it is
recommended to run `ANALYZE` or `VACUUM ANALYZE` on your entire database
to collect new statistics. The database will not have up-to-date
statistics on the tables and indexes without these operations. In turn,
this may lead to poor query plans and poor database performance.

Generally, the Aiven platform automatically runs `ANALYZE` on your
service after performing a major version upgrade in order to ensure the
statistics are up-to-date.

For more information about `ANALYZE`, you may see the official [SQL
analyze](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-analyze.html)
documentation.
