---
title: Aiven for Grafana®
---

Aiven for Grafana® is a fully managed analytics and monitoring solution, deployable in the cloud of your choice, which can bring unlimited scalability and high availability to your monitoring environment and other time series applications.

## Main features

### Quick and flexible deployment options

With Aiven for Grafana, you can enjoy a quick and flexible deployment
process, ensuring production-ready Grafana clusters are available in 10
minutes. You have the flexibility to choose your preferred public cloud
platform for deployment from over 100 regions supported. The deployment
process also includes high-performance nodes to enhance performance.
Aiven supports the Bring-Your-Own-Cloud (BYOC) deployment model,
enabling you to meet strict control requirements.

### Integrate with existing Aiven tools and data infrastructure

Aiven for Grafana seamlessly integrates various services and your
existing Aiven tools. You can set up your Aiven services as data
sources for Grafana and monitor their health in real time. This
integration allows you to leverage the full potential of your data
infrastructure, making it easier to manage and monitor. In addition to
integration with Aiven services, Aiven also offers pre-built dashboards
that allow you to monitor the health of your Aiven services. These
dashboards provide valuable insights into the performance of your
infrastructure, making it easier to identify and address potential
issues.

### Secure network connectivity

Aiven offers various options for secure network connectivity, including
[VPC peering](/docs/platform/howto/manage-vpc-peering),
[PrivateLink](/docs/tools/cli/service/privatelink), and TransitGateway
technologies. These options allow you to securely connect your data
infrastructure to Aiven services and ensure the highest level of data security.

### Log management

You can also integrate with popular logs management solutions such as
OpenSearch® and Google Cloud Logging, which help monitor your system
performance.

### Monitoring with dashboards, plugins, and alerting

-   **Dashboards and plugins:** With Aiven for Grafana, you can monitor
    your data using ready-made dashboards. Benefit from over 60 advanced
    panel and
    [data source plugins](/docs/products/grafana/reference/plugins) that provide a
    high level of customization to your
    monitoring solution.
-   **Monitoring and alerting:** Aiven for Grafana allows you to create
    monitoring solutions for all teams, enabling everyone to keep track
    of critical metrics. Additionally, you can implement an
    observability platform with alerting, ensuring that you are promptly
    notified in case of any issues.

### Automation

You can also automate the process of building, configuring, and managing
Aiven services using the [Aiven Provider for Terraform](/docs/tools/terraform/get-started).

## Related pages

- [Plans and pricing](/docs/products/grafana)
