---
title: Configure Prometheus for Aiven for Apache Kafka速 using Privatelink
---

You can integrate Prometheus with your Aiven for Apache Kafka速 service
using Privatelink for secure monitoring. This setup uses a Privatelink
load balancer, which allows for efficient service discovery of Apache
Kafka nodes and enables you to connect to your Aiven for Apache Kafka
service using a private endpoint in your network or VPCs.

## Prerequisites

Before you start, ensure you have the following:

-   [Aiven for Apache Kafka速](/docs/products/kafka/get-started) service running.
-   [Prometheus integration](/docs/platform/howto/integrations/prometheus-metrics) set up for your Aiven for Apache Kafka for extracting
    metrics.
-   Necessary permissions to modify service configurations.

## Configuration steps

### Basic configuration

Begin by configuring Prometheus to scrape metrics from your Aiven for
Apache Kafka service. This setup involves specifying various parameters
for secure data retrieval. Following is an example configuration:

```yaml
scrape_configs:
  - job_name: aivenmetrics
    scheme: https
    tls_config:
      insecure_skip_verify: true
    basic_auth:
      username: <PROMETHEUS_USERNAME>
      password: <PROMETHEUS_PASSWORD>
    http_sd_configs:
      - url: <PROMETHEUS_PRIVATELINK_ACCESS_SERVICE_URI>
        refresh_interval: 120s
        tls_config:
          insecure_skip_verify: true
        basic_auth:
          username: <PROMETHEUS_USERNAME>
          password: <PROMETHEUS_PASSWORD>
```

**Configuration details**:

-   `job_name`: Identifies the set of targets, for example,, `aivenmetrics`.

-   `scheme`: Specifies the protocol, typically `https`.

-   `tls_config`: Manages TLS settings.

    :::note
    Setting `insecure_skip_verify: true` is crucial, as it permits
    Prometheus to disregard TLS certificate validation against host IP
    addresses, facilitating seamless connectivity.
    :::

-   `basic_auth`: Provides authentication credentials for Apache Kafka
    service access.

-   `http_sd_configs`: Configures HTTP Service Discovery. Includes:

    -   `url`: The URI for Prometheus Privatelink service access.
    -   `refresh_interval`: The frequency of target list refresh, for example,,
        `120s`.

:::note
The `basic_auth` and `tls_config` are specified twice - first for
scraping the HTTP SD response and then to retrieve service metrics. This
duplication is necessary because the same authentication and security
settings are used to retrieve the service discovery information and
scrape the metrics.
:::

### (Optional) Metadata and relabeling

If your setup involves multiple Privatelink connections, you can
leverage Prometheus's relabeling for better target management. This
approach allows you to dynamically modify target label sets before
scraping.

To manage metrics from different Privatelink connections, include the
`__meta_privatelink_connection_id` label in your configuration. This
setup helps categorize and filter relevant metrics for each connection.

```yaml
relabel_configs:
  - source_labels: [__meta_privatelink_connection_id]
    regex: 1
    action: keep
```

The `regex: 1` in the configuration is a placeholder. Make sure to
replace `1` with the actual Privatelink connection ID that you wish to
monitor.

## Related pages

-   [Aiven for Apache Kafka速 metrics available via Prometheus](/docs/products/kafka/reference/kafka-metrics-prometheus)
